BLOG: Add Sparse ecosystem blog post. (#837)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/sparse-array-ecosystem.md

---
title: 'An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python'
authors: [hameer-abbasi]
published: March 19, 2024
description: 'An overview of the different options available for working with sparse arrays in Python'
category: [PyData ecosystem, OSS Experience]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  alt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  imageAlt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
---

# An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python

## Why Sparse Arrays?

### Sparsity in nature

> We live in a locally-connected universe. What this means is every particle in the universe can only influence its local neighbourhood of particles (or at least a small number of particles compared to what's out there) at a given time. For this reason, most arrays that show up in nature as adjacency arrays representing connections between particles are sparse. One might also say they are hypersparse, due to the sheer amount of difference between the non-background-value elements and the total elements. Many other arrays, representing connections between components of a circuit, perhaps, or a mechanical system, will also be sparse. What's more, these arrays typically become sparser as the system becomes more complex.

Reviewer: This, I believe, ignores quantum entanglement, but this should be considered a minor quibble. :)

In general, I find this paragraph forced. IMO you would be better off with explicit motivating use cases/real-world applications. E.g., three use cases, which, in an ideal world, lend themselves to three different "ideal" sparse layout formats.

The tie-in to layout formats would be a nice touch, as would help set the stage for a short introduction to layout formats, their wide variety, and why sparse array libraries cannot all seem to agree on the same ones.

Author: I've added three real-world examples in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/5e25d8b27f2529e81f712231486770a62adb9141, corresponding to CSR/CSC, DIA and COO respectively.

### Exploiting sparsity

> We can exploit the natural sparsity of these arrays in two main ways: storage and compute. By recognizing patterns in the data, one can reduce the storage required to store such arrays. Additionally, one can also reduce the time required to perform operations on such arrays. Sometimes (depending on the exact patterns, and also on the sparsity) one can reduce the time required from being brazenly impossible even on a large supercomputer; to being lightning fast on your cell phone. Many algorithms take advantage of sparsity without advertising it, but by providing a solid framework, many of these algorithms can be expressed using the more natural language of array computing.

Reviewer: Illustrative examples can help out here. We shouldn't assume that readers are sparsity experts and can picture in their minds what it means to exploit sparsity via storage and compute. E.g., should be possible to model a problem as a dense matrix, compute its storage size, and then do the same but compressing into a sparse format.

Similarly, what algorithms take advantage of sparsity without advertising it? 

An example real-world use case you could also mention regarding the "brazenly impossible" could be Amazon product reviews, as Kolstad references in his thesis (from exabytes to something more manageable).

Author: I've re-written this section in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/868274cdc6e4d2c5c650cce809fcebc7f3d37368.

> ## What tools can I use?

Reviewer: What's the history here? Who came first? second? And why are there these different libraries? Can't everyone agree on a single library and just get along?

Reviewer: IMO, instead of four separate sections with little content, I'd weave into an oral history of the projects and how they came to be. Wouldn't need to get too deep into the weeds, but enough high level notes to see the story. As an illustrative example, the SciPy and NumPy Nature papers did a decent job of setting the stage for the current day.

Author: Would you have a good source for such information? You mentioned the SciPy paper which might give details on `scipy.sparse`, and I know the history for `sparse`, but unfortunately I didn't follow along as things progressed in the other libraries.

Author: I've added some starting dates in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/1c47ebd288ab7283d804fee1b80684d0a6f29c24.

### [`sparse`](https://sparse.pydata.org/)

> Also known as PyData/Sparse, this is a library maintained by yours truly. Its original aim was to provide a NumPy-like API for working with N-dimensional sparse arrays. With the emergence of the [Array API standard](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/) and research into Sparse array computing, the aim has shifted to providing perfomant sparse array operations following the Array API standard, though we are some time away from reaching that goal.

Reviewer: Not sure whether the original aim and the "pivot" are particularly distinct. Seems like the same path.

This is one of the original/popular sparse matrix libraries. For a long time, it followed a discouraged corner of NumPy's API and was also limited to exactly two dimensional matrices. Work is underway to make it conform to a more modern API. Details can be found here in [various discussion posts on the SciPy Discourse](https://discuss.scientific-python.org/tag/sparse-arrays).

### [`cupyx.sparse`](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/reference/scipy_sparse.html)

This member of the sparse array libraries follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD's GPUs.

### [`torch.sparse`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/sparse.html)

This submodule of PyTorch allows one to create and operate on mainly N-dimensional COO arrays on the CPU or GPU.

## API and Performance Comparison

### Format Support

Support for many different formats can be important, especially as they usually represent differing patterns of sparsity, which in turn represent differing mathematical structures and patterns in nature. Native support for a wide variety of formats can be the key to unlocking a lot of performance and/or saving memory.

> All formats have a number of read/write characteristics. For reading, they can be random access or sequential access, similarly with adding data to a sparse array. Whether they are ordered sequentially in memory is important, as this improves performance and compactness of the format. We list these characteristics below together with which library supports a format. We have also included a row for N-dimensional capabilities.

Reviewer: You list formats, but to the lay reader they are acronyms. Would be good to give an overview of formats and why I should care and maybe touch on why libraries have chosen to only implement specific ones. Is it because of implementation complexity? because certain formats get you 99% of the way there? have better general performance? etc.

For some figure inspiration, I shared with you the DARPA kickoff slide deck in which we uses animated GIFs for different formats which drew from:

- https://matteding.github.io/2019/04/25/sparse-matrices/
- https://github.com/MattEding/Python-Article-Resources/blob/master/sparse-matrix/sparse_matrix.ipynb

| **DOK**           | ✅              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚧           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **CSR/CSC**       | 🚫              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚧           | ✅                 | ✅                 | 🚧                 |
| **LIL**           | 🚫              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚫                 |
| **DIA**           | ✅              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **BSR**           | ✅<sup>1</sup>  | ✅<sup>1</sup>   | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚧                 |
| **N-dimensional** |                 |                  |                     | ✅           | 🚫                 | 🚫                 | ✅                 |

<sup>1</sup> Within same block if it exists <br />
✅ Available, with optimized loops for atomic operations <br />
🚧 Present, with intermediate conversions or sub-optimal iterations <br />
🚫 Unavailable

> ### Array Creation API

Reviewer: I'd expect code examples in this section.

Author: Converted the lists to code examples in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/0711662b47513d423876b90dbe909cf897198698.

Here, we will compare how to create sparse arrays with the different libraries, as well as any kinks and notable pain points.

#### `sparse`

`sparse` provides two main options for constructing arrays:

1. From an existing array with [`sparse.asarray`](https://sparse.pydata.org/en/stable/generated/sparse.asarray.html).
2. By creating a [`sparse.DOK`](https://sparse.pydata.org/en/stable/generated/sparse.DOK.html) instance, populating it, then using [`sparse.DOK.asformat`](https://sparse.pydata.org/en/stable/generated/sparse.DOK.asformat.html).
3. By specifying the constituent data or arrays.

> One notable pain point for `sparse` is its performance: It's notably slower than equivalent SciPy operations.

Reviewer: Things published on the web can have a long shelf life. So I'd be careful about speaking in definite terms, especially if, as we may hope, the landscape shifts in the next couple of years.

I think you can flesh out some content here by showing a plot comparing perf results for array creation across the different libraries.

Author: I've reworded this and added the fact that work is ongoing in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/3ee3120e76230d686f4a878658b4fe468e98267a.

#### `cupyx.sparse` and `scipy.sparse`

One can do any of the following to create a `scipy.sparse` or `cupyx.sparse` array:

1. Use `array_type(existing_obj)`, as [an example CSR](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.sparse.csr_array.html).
2. (Only for SciPy) Instantiate a [`scipy.sparse.dok_array`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.sparse.dok_array.html), populate it, and then use [`scipy.sparse.dok_array.asformat`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.sparse.dok_array.asformat.html#scipy.sparse.dok_array.asformat)
   - For `cupyx.sparse`, we can later move the array to the GPU.
3. Use `array_type(tuple_of_constituent_arrays)`.

The main pain points for this set of libraries are twofold:

1. They only support 2-D arrays or matrices.

> 2. Most of the existing work only exists for the old, deprecated `np.matrix` interface. SciPy is trying to move away from that, but progress there is slow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Most of the existing work only exists for the old, deprecated `np.matrix` interface. SciPy has recently, however, begun work to migrate away from `np.matrix`.
```

We can leave out our judgment. :)

#### `torch.sparse`

To create a sparse array, one can:

1. Call the [`torch.Tensor.to_sparse`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.Tensor.to_sparse.html) on an existing `Tensor` (or any of the `to_sparse_*` format-specific methods).
2. By calling the format-specific constructors, for example [`torch.sparse_coo_tensor`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.sparse_coo_tensor.html), to create a format from its constituent arrays.

> The main pain points for `torch.sparse` is the differing API from most other libraries, and lack of DOK support to construct hyper-sparse tensors intuitively.

Reviewer: What's different? Are there things to like about what they've done?

Author: I've modified the wording in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/66c93e1c5541f1a6dab86093346445e8af41b02a.

### Honorable Mentions

There are a number of honorable mentions that haven't managed to gain enough traction to be included in this list:

- [**`jax.experimental.sparse`**](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.experimental.sparse.html): A forward-thinking sparse array module based on the [MLIR sparse tensor dialect](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/SparseTensorOps/).
- [**`pysparse`**](https://pysparse.sourceforge.net/): Not to be confused with `sparse`, this was a package that didn't take off, but has a rather common name.
- [**TACO**](http://tensor-compiler.org/): A C++ package with Python bindings by some of the brains behind performant sparse code generation.
- [**`finch-tensor` and `Finch.jl`**](https://willowahrens.io/Finch.jl/dev): A Julia package with respective Python bindings that's also showing promise and contains some novel research on performant sparse computing.

## Conclusion

> The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. The meme below illustrates the options available to users. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole commpunity.

Reviewer: Not clear to me how the meme supports the concept of fragmentation.

Author: Removed the meme in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/56e6d1adcbe45f4b1b10464706b750681797fe41.

---
title: 'An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python'
authors: [hameer-abbasi]
published: March 19, 2024
description: 'An overview of the different options available for working with sparse arrays in Python'
category: [PyData ecosystem, OSS Experience]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  alt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  imageAlt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
---

# An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python

## Why Sparse Arrays?

### Sparsity in nature

There are many examples of loosely-connected systems that lend themselves well to an expression in terms of sparse arrays. Let's illustrate this claim with a few examples:

#### An [impedance matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_parameters) for a circuit

> An impedance matrix for a linear circuit (which is a circuit comprising purely of resistors, capacitors, inductors, alongside connections between them) with `N` ports is an `N ✕ N` matrix, with each entry representing the connection between two ports. Where no connection is present, the Z-matrix, as it is also known, has a value of infinity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An impedance matrix for a linear circuit (which is a circuit comprised purely of resistors, capacitors, inductors, and the connections between them) with `N` ports is an `N ✕ N` matrix, with each entry representing the connection between two ports. Where no connection is present, the Z-matrix, as it is also known, has a value of infinity.
```

> Consider that in a large circuit with many ports, due to physical limitations and also to keep the design simple, the amount of connections do not scale as `N²`, but usually as a much lower factor. This means, in essence, that the larger the circuit; the sparser its impedance matrix will be, if the background value is taken to be infinity. Due to technologies such as multi-layer PCBs, there isn't usually a clear pattern as to which ports will be connected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to physical limitations and also to keep the design simple, in a large circuit with many ports, the number of connections does not scale as `N²`, but usually as a much lower factor. Accordingly, this means that the larger the circuit, the sparser its impedance matrix will be, so long as we assume that the background value is taken to be infinity. Due to technologies such as multi-layer PCBs, there isn't usually a clear pattern as to which ports will be connected.
```

#### [Convolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolution)

> Convolution is simply the smearing out of one signal, with the "shape" of the smearing depending on another signal, called a kernel. Mathematically, each sample in a discrete signal would only affect its neighbours. Thus, if this relationship were to be expressed in a matrix, it would have samples concentrated along the diagonal, but for long signals and short kernels; this matrix would also be very sparse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Convolution can be viewed as the smearing out of one signal, with the "shape" of the smearing depending on another signal, called a kernel. Mathematically, each sample in a discrete signal would only affect its neighbours. Thus, if this relationship were to be expressed in a matrix, it would have samples concentrated along the diagonal, but for long signals and short kernels; this matrix would also be very sparse.
```

#### NLP Use-case

> Consider an natural-language processing use-case where we parse statements of the form `(subject, object, predicate)`, such as, for example `(Hameer, this blog post, authored)`. This particular predicate would be true. On the other hand, `(Elephant, fish, is)` would be false. Now consider the massive space of all predicates arranged into a 3-dimensional array, we would give them a value of `+1` for true or `-1` for untrue, or `0` for unknown or to be predicted. Such an array would have a shape of `N ✕ N ✕ K` where `N` is the number of entities and `K` is the number of predicates. Such a system would also be very sparse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a natural-language processing use-case where we parse statements of the form `(subject, object, predicate)` (e.g., `(Hameer, this blog post, authored)`). This particular predicate would be true. On the other hand, `(Elephant, fish, is)` would be false. If we then consider the massive space of all predicates arranged into a 3-dimensional array, we would give them a value of `+1` for true, `-1` for untrue, and `0` for unknown (or to be predicted). Such an array would have a shape of `N ✕ N ✕ K`, where `N` is the number of entities and `K` is the number of predicates. Such a system would also be very sparse, as many triplets would be exceedingly unlikely.
```

### Exploiting sparsity

> Sparsity can be exploited in many algorithms in two main ways. The first is storage: By simply "not storing" the background value, we can save on a lot of storage. Of course, this means that one has to store information about what elements are actually not at the background value. This usually implies storing extra information beyond just the values of the present elements; it implies we must also encode their position. This implies two trade-offs we must make. The first is, if the fraction of present values (often called simply the _density_ of a sparse array) is more than a certain threshold; it may simply be better to store the array as a simple dense array. The other trade-off is more subtle: What scheme should we use for encoding the positions of the present values? The presence of multiple schemes with their own benefits and drawbacks is presented below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sparsity can be exploited in many algorithms in two main ways. The first is storage. For example, by simply "not storing" the background value, we can save on a lot of storage. Of course, this means that one has to store information about what elements are actually not at the background value. This usually implies storing extra information beyond just the values of the present elements; we must also encode their position. This further implies two trade-offs that we must make. The first is, if the fraction of present values (often called simply the _density_ of a sparse array) is more than a certain threshold, it may be better to store the array as a simple dense array. The other trade-off is more subtle: what scheme should we use for encoding the positions of the present values? The presence of multiple schemes with their own benefits and drawbacks is presented below.
```

The second main way we can take advantage of sparsity is via compute. By "skipping over" the background values; one can exceed the speed of a dense algorithm; once again assuming that the density does not exceed some threshold. This is, once again, not as simple as it may seem at first glance: A sparse algorithm needs to combine present values and their corresponding positions from different arrays and decide the value and presence of a corresponding element in the output array. We see a common pitfall here when writing sparse algorithms: If at any point; we accidentally iterate over the missing values, we risk losing many performance benefits of a sparse algorithm.

### Common Formats

> In the last section, we hinted at different schemes for storing the positions of present values in sparse arrays. Such a scheme is known more commonly as a (sparse array) _format_. What format is best for storing some data is often determined by the pattern of present values in the data, the sparsity of the data, and some other considerations. Let's explore further by seeing a two common example formats for illustrative purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last section, we hinted at different schemes for storing the positions of present values in sparse arrays. Such a scheme is known more commonly as a (sparse array) _format_. What format is best for storing a particular set of data is often determined by the pattern of present values in the data, the sparsity of the data, and some other considerations. Let's explore further by seeing two common example formats for illustrative purposes.
```

#### Dictionary-of-keys (DOK)

This is one of the simplest formats to explain, so we begin with this one. The idea is that we have a dictionary that stores the coordinates of present values as the key, with the value representing the value of the array at that coordinate. Let's illustrate with a small example using the `sparse` library.

```python
>>> import numpy as np
>>> import sparse
>>> import pprint
>>> eye_dok = sparse.DOK.from_numpy(np.eye(5))
>>> pprint.pp(eye_dok.data)
{(0, 0): 1.0, (1, 1): 1.0, (2, 2): 1.0, (3, 3): 1.0, (4, 4): 1.0}
```

This format has a number of advantages:

1. It's simple to implement.
2. It supports insertion into any coordinate by inserting the appropriate key-value pair into the dictionary.
3. Random access is possible by retrieving a key from the dictionary.

However, it also has a number of disadvantages:

> 1. Iterating over values may be random, depending on the dictionary implementation. This creates problems when combining different arrays; and checking the presence of a given row or column (one can only check the presence of an element efficiently).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Iterating over values may be random, depending on the dictionary implementation. This creates problems when combining different arrays and when checking the presence of a given row or column (one can only check the presence of an element efficiently).
```

> 2. It suffers from a higher memory usage than some other formats, as dictionaries take up more space than arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Because dictionaries take up more space than arrays, it suffers from higher memory usage than some other formats.
```

> 3. Retrieval of a single element may be fast, but it's slower than a similar access from an array due to hashing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Retrieval of a single element may be fast, but it's slower than similar access into an array due to hashing.
```

### COOrdinate Format

> This format is also extremely simple, it stores one array of values, and a corresponding array of positions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This format is also relatively straightforward, it stores one array of values, and a corresponding array of positions.
```

Avoid telling the reader what is "simple". They may not agree, and, by telling them something is simple, you may stir feelings of deficiency in them for "not getting it".

```python
>>> eye_coo = sparse.COO.from_numpy(np.eye(5))
>>> eye_coo.coords
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
       [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]])
>>> eye_coo.data
array([1., 1., 1., 1., 1.])
```

The advantages for this one are the flip-side of DOK:

1. It's simple to implement.
2. If the constituent arrays are stored as lists, one can easily append a new coordinate. However, we risk working with out-of-order indices that way.
3. Storage is near-optimal (for hyper-sparse arrays).
4. Iterating in-order is possible if the constituent arrays are sorted.

> Here are some disadvantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the format has some disadvantages:
```

> 1. Random access using a coordinate isn't possible, one has to search for an existing coordiate. This may be easy if the coordinates are sorted or hard if they're not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Random access using a coordinate isn't possible. One has to search for an existing coordinate. This may be easy if the coordinates are sorted and hard if they're not.
```

> 2. Random insertion makes the coordinates go out of order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Random insertion causes the coordinates to be inserted out of order.
```

3. Sorting may be frequently required.

> 

Reviewer: I think you also want to have a small `### Other formats` section here before jumping to tools that mentions/lists the various other formats (CSR, CCR, blocked, etc).

Author: Done in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/4761fc3eb74286ade1d9344427b00551b44b5724.

> ## What tools can I use?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Python Libraries for Sparse Arrays
```

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to have a transition paragraph here. You jump straight from a brief discussion on formats to "Here's a list of libraries". The transition paragraph does not have to be anything grand. Something along the lines of

> While choosing the right format can be tricky, thankfully, Python has a number of libraries providing sparse array storage and compute capabilities. Some of these libraries have been around for some time, while others are relatively new to the scene. I'll briefly discuss a few of the major players.

...or something similar.

Author: Done in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/4761fc3eb74286ade1d9344427b00551b44b5724.

### [`sparse`](https://sparse.pydata.org/)

> Also known as PyData/Sparse, this is a library maintained by yours truly. Its aim is to provide perfomant sparse array operations following the Array API standard, though we are some time away from reaching that goal. The work on this library started in April 2017, with the author of this blog post taking over maintenance around January 2018.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`sparse` (also known as PyData/Sparse) is a library maintained by yours truly. Its aim is to provide perfomant sparse array operations following the Array API standard, though we are some time away from reaching that goal. The work on this library started in April 2017, with the author of this blog post taking over maintenance around January 2018.
```

Reviewer: You also want to mention sparse's key selling point: a drop-in NumPy replacement with support for **n-dimensional** sparse arrays.

Author: Done in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/4761fc3eb74286ade1d9344427b00551b44b5724.

> 

Reviewer: To make these sections a bit meatier, maybe, for each library, demonstrate the same code snippet for each. The snippet could be a short script performing some basic operations.

Reviewer: Okay. I see that the Array Creation section below basically achieves this ask. Maybe instead of having those examples below, you can interleave them here. For example, move L145-L160 to here. In the `scipy.sparse` section, move L164-L186 (splitting out the CuPy sparse example to the CuPy section). Similarly for PyTorch.

Then you can move the "Honorable Mentions" section to before `## API and Performance Comparison`.

That make sense?

Author: Done in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/4761fc3eb74286ade1d9344427b00551b44b5724.

### [`scipy.sparse`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html)

> This is one of the original/popular sparse matrix libraries. For a long time, it followed a discouraged corner of NumPy's API and was also limited to exactly two dimensional matrices. Work is underway to make it conform to a more modern API. Details can be found here in [various discussion posts on the SciPy Discourse](https://discuss.scientific-python.org/tag/sparse-arrays). It existed since before SciPy was moved to GitHub, or even TRAC, with the earliest references pointing to 2006.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`scipy.sparse` is one of the original sparse matrix libraries. The library has existed since before SciPy was moved to GitHub, or even TRAC, with the earliest references pointing to 2006. It is built on NumPy matrices and has been limited to two dimensional sparse arrays. Work is underway to migrate `scipy.sparse` away from NumPy matrices (a discouraged corner of NumPy's API) and to conform to a more modern API. Details can be found here in [various discussion posts on the SciPy Discourse](https://discuss.scientific-python.org/tag/sparse-arrays).
```

### [`cupyx.sparse`](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/reference/scipy_sparse.html)

This member of the sparse array libraries follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD's GPUs. Work on `cupyx.sparse` started around 2017.

### [`torch.sparse`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/sparse.html)

> This submodule of PyTorch allows one to create and operate on mainly N-dimensional COO arrays on the CPU or GPU. Work on `torch.sparse` existed in early releases of PyTorch, around 2016.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This submodule of PyTorch allows one to create and operate on mainly N-dimensional COO arrays on the CPU or GPU. Work on `torch.sparse` existed in early releases of PyTorch, starting around 2016.
```

## API and Performance Comparison

### Format Support

> Support for many different formats can be important, especially as they usually represent differing patterns of sparsity, which in turn represent differing mathematical structures and patterns in nature. Native support for a wide variety of formats can be the key to unlocking a lot of performance and/or saving memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for many different formats can be important, especially as they usually represent differing patterns of sparsity, which in turn represent differing mathematical structures and patterns in nature. Native support for a wide variety of formats can be the key to unlocking significant memory and performance gains.
```

> All formats have a number of read/write characteristics. For reading, they can be random access or sequential access, similarly with adding data to a sparse array. Whether they are ordered sequentially in memory is important, as this improves performance and compactness of the format. We list these characteristics below together with which library supports a format. We have also included a row for N-dimensional capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All formats have a number of read/write characteristics. For reading, they can be random access or sequential access. The same applies to writing data to a sparse array. Whether they are ordered sequentially in memory is important, as this improves performance and compactness of the format. We list these characteristics below together with which library supports a format. We have also included a row for N-dimensional capabilities.
```

| **DOK**           | ✅              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚧           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **CSR/CSC**       | 🚫              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚧           | ✅                 | ✅                 | 🚧                 |
| **LIL**           | 🚫              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚫                 |
| **DIA**           | ✅              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **BSR**           | ✅<sup>1</sup>  | ✅<sup>1</sup>   | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚧                 |
| **N-dimensional** |                 |                  |                     | ✅           | 🚫                 | 🚫                 | ✅                 |

<sup>1</sup> Within same block if it exists, otherwise similar to CSC. <br />
✅ Available, with optimized loops for atomic operations <br />
🚧 Present, with intermediate conversions or sub-optimal iterations <br />
🚫 Unavailable

### Array Creation API

> Here, we will compare how to create sparse arrays with the different libraries, as well as any kinks and notable pain points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help make things a bit more concrete, let's compare sparse array creation in different libraries and, while doing so, make a note of any notable pain points.
```

# Use `dok_array` or `dok_matrix` and then `.asformat`
spy_arr_dok = scipy.sparse.dok_array(shape, dtype=...)  # Instantiate
spy_arr_dok[...] = ...  # Assign repeatedly
spy_arr_csr = spy_arr_dok.asformat("csr")  # Convert
cpy_mat_csr = cupyx.sparse.csr_matrix(spy_arr_csr)  # Move to GPU

# Use `array_type(tuple_of_constituent_arrays)`
spz_arr_csr = scipy.sparse.csr_array((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # NumPy arrays
cpz_mat_csr = cupyx.sparse.csr_array((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # CuPy arrays
```

The main pain points for this set of libraries are twofold:

1. They only support 2-D arrays or matrices.
2. Most of the existing work only exists for the deprecated `np.matrix` interface. SciPy has recently begun work to migrate away from `np.matrix`, but it remains the only option in `cupyx.sparse`.

#### `torch.sparse`

To create a sparse array, one can:

```python
# Call `.to_sparse or .to_sparse_* methods`
spx = x.to_sparse([layout=...])
spx_csr = x.to_sparse_csr()

# Call constructors and use constituent arrays
spy_coo = torch.sparse.coo_tensor(coords, data, [shape, dtype=...])
spy_csr = torch.sparse.csr_tensor(indices, indptr, data, [shape, dtype=...])
```

> The main pain points for `torch.sparse` is the lack of Array API support, differing API from most other libraries (such as lack of a `asformat` method, and format-specific methods), and lack of DOK support to construct hyper-sparse tensors intuitively. On the flip side, `torch.sparse` is the only library to allow for N-dimensional GPU sparse arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main pain points for `torch.sparse` is the lack of Array API support, with an API differing from most other libraries. For example, the library lacks an `asformat` method and various format-specific methods and lacks DOK support for constructing hyper-sparse tensors in an intuitive manner. On the flip side, `torch.sparse` is the only library to allow for N-dimensional GPU sparse arrays.
```

### Honorable Mentions

There are a number of honorable mentions that haven't managed to gain enough traction to be included in this list:

- [**`jax.experimental.sparse`**](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.experimental.sparse.html): A forward-thinking sparse array module based on the [MLIR sparse tensor dialect](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/SparseTensorOps/).
- [**`pysparse`**](https://pysparse.sourceforge.net/): Not to be confused with `sparse`, this was a package that didn't take off, but has a rather common name.
- [**TACO**](http://tensor-compiler.org/): A C++ package with Python bindings by some of the brains behind performant sparse code generation.
- [**`finch-tensor` and `Finch.jl`**](https://willowahrens.io/Finch.jl/dev): A Julia package with respective Python bindings that's also showing promise and contains some novel research on performant sparse computing.

## Conclusion

> The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. The meme below illustrates the options available to users. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole commpunity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. The meme below illustrates the options available to users. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight, along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL, have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole community.
```

Reviewer: There's no longer a "meme", correct?

Reviewer: Also, yes, the ecosystem is fragmented, but also it is relatively nascent. It's a hard problem without a general solution. The DARPA grant is an attempt to provide a truly general solution.

Author: Done in https://github.com/Quansight/Quansight-website/pull/837/commits/4761fc3eb74286ade1d9344427b00551b44b5724.

> There's no longer a "meme", correct?

Removed the mention, thanks for catching that.

> Also, yes, the ecosystem is fragmented, but also it is relatively nascent. It's a hard problem without a general solution. The DARPA grant is an attempt to provide a truly general solution.

Added a few words to this effect.

---
title: 'An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python'

> authors: [hameer-abbasi]

Author: @kgryte Would you like to be added to the authors here? Given the significant guidance, you're practically a co-author of the post.

Reviewer: @hameerabbasi No, that is not necessary, but thanks for asking. Happy to help review! 🙌

published: March 19, 2024
description: 'An overview of the different options available for working with sparse arrays in Python'
category: [PyData ecosystem, OSS Experience]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  alt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/sparse-array-ecosystem/title.png
  imageAlt: 'A mind-map of the main components of the sparse array ecosystem'
---

# An overview of the Sparse Array Ecosystem for Python

## Why Sparse Arrays?

### Sparsity in nature

There are many examples of loosely-connected systems that lend themselves well to an expression in terms of sparse arrays. Let's illustrate this claim with a few examples:

> #### An [impedance matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_parameters) for a circuit
> 
> An impedance matrix for a linear circuit (which is a circuit comprised purely of resistors, capacitors, inductors, and the connections between them) with `N` ports is an `N ✕ N` matrix, with each entry representing the connection between two ports. Where no connection is present, the Z-matrix, as it is also known, has a value of infinity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### An impedance matrix for a circuit

An [impedance matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_parameters) for a linear circuit (which is a circuit comprised purely of resistors, capacitors, inductors, and the connections between them) with `N` ports is an `N ✕ N` matrix, with each entry representing the connection between two ports. Where no connection is present, the Z-matrix, as it is also known, has a value of infinity.
```

Due to physical limitations and also to keep the design simple, in a large circuit with many ports, the number of connections does not scale as `N²`, but usually as a much lower factor. Accordingly, this means that the larger the circuit, the sparser its impedance matrix will be, so long as we assume that the background value is taken to be infinity. In general, due to technologies such as multi-layer PCBs, there isn't usually a clear pattern as to which ports will be connected.

> #### [Convolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolution)
> 
> Convolution can be viewed as the smearing out of one signal, with the "shape" of the smearing depending on another signal called a kernel. Mathematically, each sample in a discrete signal would only affect its neighbors. Thus, if this relationship were to be expressed in a matrix, it would have samples concentrated along the diagonal. Except for long signals and short kernels, this matrix would tend to be very sparse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Convolution

[Convolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolution) can be viewed as the smearing out of one signal, with the "shape" of the smearing depending on another signal called a kernel. Mathematically, each sample in a discrete signal would only affect its neighbors. Thus, if this relationship were to be expressed in a matrix, it would have samples concentrated along the diagonal. Except for long signals and short kernels, this matrix would tend to be very sparse.
```

> #### NLP Use-case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Natural language processing
```

Consider a natural-language processing use-case where we parse statements of the form `(subject, object, predicate)` (e.g., `(Hameer, this blog post, authored)`). This particular predicate would be true. On the other hand, `(Elephant, fish, is)` would be false. If we then consider the massive space of all predicates arranged into a 3-dimensional array, we would give them a value of `+1` for true, `-1` for untrue, and `0` for unknown (or to be predicted). Such an array would have a shape of `N ✕ N ✕ K`, where `N` is the number of entities and `K` is the number of predicates. Such a system would also be very sparse, as many triplets would be exceedingly unlikely.

### Exploiting sparsity

> Sparsity can be exploited in many algorithms in two main ways. The first is storage. For example, by simply "not storing" the background value, we can save on a lot of storage. Of course, this means that one has to store information about what elements are actually not at the background value. This usually implies storing extra information beyond just the values of the present elements; we must also encode their position. This further implies two trade-offs that we must make. The first is, if the fraction of present values (often called simply the _density_ of a sparse array) is more than a certain threshold, it may be better to store the array as a simple dense array. The other trade-off is more subtle: what scheme should we use for encoding the positions of the present values? The presence of multiple schemes with their own benefits and drawbacks is presented below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sparsity can be exploited in many algorithms in two main ways. The first is storage. For example, by simply "not storing" the background value, we can save on a lot of storage. Of course, this means that one has to store information about what elements are actually not at the background value. This usually implies storing extra information beyond just the values of the present elements; we must also encode their positions. This further implies two trade-offs that we must make. The first is, if the fraction of present values (often called simply the _density_ of a sparse array) is more than a certain threshold, it may be better to store the array as a simple dense array. The other trade-off is more subtle: what scheme should we use for encoding the positions of the present values? The presence of multiple schemes with their own benefits and drawbacks is presented below.
```

> The second main way we can take advantage of sparsity is via compute. For example, if we consider the background scenario described above (see circuit use case), by "skipping over" the background values, one can exceed the speed of a dense algorithm, so long as we can once again assume that the density does not exceed some threshold. This is not as simple as it may seem at first glance. A sparse algorithm needs to combine values and their corresponding positions from different arrays and decide the value and presence of a corresponding element in the output array. We can thus see a common pitfall here when writing sparse algorithms. If at any point, we accidentally iterate over missing values, we risk losing many performance benefits of a sparse algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second main way we can take advantage of sparsity is via compute. For example, if we consider the background scenario described above (see circuit use case), by "skipping over" the background values, one can exceed the speed of a dense algorithm, so long as we can once again assume that the density does not exceed some threshold. This is not as simple as it may seem at first glance. A sparse algorithm needs to combine values and their corresponding positions from different arrays and decide the value and presence of a corresponding element in the output array. We can thus see a common pitfall when writing sparse algorithms. If, at any point, we accidentally iterate over missing values, we risk losing many performance benefits of a sparse algorithm.
```

```python
>>> eye_coo = sparse.COO.from_numpy(np.eye(5))
>>> eye_coo.coords
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
       [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]])
>>> eye_coo.data
array([1., 1., 1., 1., 1.])
```

The advantages for this one are the flip-side of DOK:

1. It's simple to implement.
2. If the constituent arrays are stored as lists, one can easily append a new coordinate. However, we risk working with out-of-order indices that way.
3. Storage is near-optimal (for hyper-sparse arrays).
4. Iterating in-order is possible if the constituent arrays are sorted.

However, the format has some disadvantages:

1. Random access using a coordinate isn't possible. One has to search for an existing coordinate. This may be easy if the coordinates are sorted and hard if they're not.
2. Random insertion causes the coordinates to be inserted out of order.
3. Sorting may be frequently required.

### Other Formats

There are many other formats, each with their own set of advantages and disadvantages:

- CSR/CSC are popular 2-dimensional formats, with fast row-major or column-major access respectively.
- Blocked formats are versions of formats which can store dense regions in a blocked structure.

> Of course, it one can come up with their own way of encoding the positions, and therefore their own format. In this sense, it is important to recognize we aren't limited to the formats we mention here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is, however, important to recognize that we aren't limited to the formats we mention here. You can come up with your own way of encoding the positions and thus your own special brand of sparse array format!
```

## Python Libraries for Sparse Arrays

While choosing the right format can be tricky, thankfully, Python has a number of libraries providing sparse array storage and compute capabilities. Some of these libraries have been around for some time, while others are relatively new to the scene. I'll briefly discuss a few of the major players.

> ### [`sparse`](https://sparse.pydata.org/)
> 
> `sparse` (also known as PyData/Sparse) is a library maintained by yours truly. Its aim is to provide perfomant sparse array operations following the Array API standard, though we are some time away from reaching that goal. The work on this library started in April 2017, with the author of this blog post taking over maintenance around January 2018. `sparse` provides a drop-in replacement for NumPy arrays, with support for **n-dimensional** arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### sparse

[`sparse`](https://sparse.pydata.org/) (also known as PyData/Sparse) is a library maintained by yours truly. Its aim is to provide perfomant sparse array operations following the Array API standard, though we are some time away from reaching that goal. The work on this library started in April 2017, with the author of this blog post taking over maintenance around January 2018. `sparse` provides a drop-in replacement for NumPy arrays, with support for **n-dimensional** arrays.
```

`sparse` provides a few main options for constructing arrays:

```python
# 1. with `sparse.asarray`
spx = sparse.asarray(x, [format=...])

# 2. Create a `sparse.DOK` and then convert
spy = sparse.DOK(shape=..., dtype=...)  # Instantiate
spy[...] = ...  # Assign repeatedly
spy = spy.asformat(...)  # Convert

# 3. By specifying the constituent arrays
spz = sparse.COO(shape=..., data=..., coords=...)
```

> One current pain point for `sparse` is its performance: It's notably slower than equivalent SciPy operations. Work is ongoing to resolve this difference in performance while maintaining generality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One current pain point for `sparse` is its performance: it's notably slower than equivalent SciPy operations. Work is ongoing to resolve this difference in performance while maintaining generality.
```

> ### [`scipy.sparse`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html)
> 
> `scipy.sparse` is one of the original sparse matrix libraries. The library has existed since before SciPy was moved to GitHub, or even TRAC, with the earliest references pointing to 2006. It is built on NumPy matrices and has been limited to two dimensional sparse arrays. Work is underway to migrate `scipy.sparse` away from NumPy matrices (a discouraged corner of NumPy's API) and to conform to a more modern API. Details can be found here in [various discussion posts on the SciPy Discourse](https://discuss.scientific-python.org/tag/sparse-arrays).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### scipy.sparse

[`scipy.sparse`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html) is one of the original sparse matrix libraries. The library has existed since before SciPy was moved to GitHub, or even TRAC, with the earliest references pointing to 2006. It is built on NumPy matrices and has been limited to two dimensional sparse arrays. Work is underway to migrate `scipy.sparse` away from NumPy matrices (a discouraged corner of NumPy's API) and to conform to a more modern API. Details can be found here in [various discussion posts on the SciPy Discourse](https://discuss.scientific-python.org/tag/sparse-arrays).
```

One can do any of the following to create a `scipy.sparse` array:

```python
# Use `array_type(existing_arr)`
spx_arr_csr = scipy.sparse.csr_array(x)
spx_mat_coo = scipy.sparse.coo_matrix(x)
spx_mat_csc = scipy.sparse.csc_matrix(x)

# Use `dok_array` or `dok_matrix` and then `.asformat`
spy_arr_dok = scipy.sparse.dok_array(shape, dtype=...)  # Instantiate
spy_arr_dok[...] = ...  # Assign repeatedly
spy_arr_csr = spy_arr_dok.asformat("csr")  # Convert

# Use `array_type(tuple_of_constituent_arrays)`
spz_arr_csr = scipy.sparse.csr_array((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # NumPy arrays
spz_mat_csr = scipy.sparse.csr_array((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # NumPy arrays
```

The main pain points for this library are twofold:

> 1. They only support 2-D arrays or matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It only supports 2-D arrays or matrices.
```

2. Most of the existing work only exists for the deprecated `np.matrix` interface. SciPy has recently begun work to migrate away from `np.matrix`.

> ### [`cupyx.sparse`](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/reference/scipy_sparse.html)
> 
> This member of the sparse array libraries follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD GPUs. Work on `cupyx.sparse` started around 2017.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### cupyx.sparse

[`cupyx.sparse`](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/reference/scipy_sparse.html) is a member of the sparse array libraries which follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD GPUs. Work on `cupyx.sparse` started around 2017.
```

> This member of the sparse array libraries follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD's GPUs. Work on `cupyx.sparse` started around 2017.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This member of the sparse array libraries follows an interface that closely mirrors SciPy's, while executing on Nvidia and AMD GPUs. Work on `cupyx.sparse` started around 2017.
```

One can do any of the following to create a `cupyx.sparse` array:

```python
# Use `array_type(existing_arr)`
cpx_arr_csr = cupyx.sparse.csr_matrix(x)
cpx_mat_coo = cupyx.sparse.coo_matrix(x)
cpx_mat_csc = cupyx.sparse.csc_matrix(x)

# Use `array_type(tuple_of_constituent_arrays)`
cpz_arr_csr = cupyx.sparse.csr_matrix((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # Cupy arrays
cpz_mat_csr = cupyx.sparse.csr_matrix((data, indices, indptr), shape=...)  # CuPy arrays
```

CuPy also has some disadvantages:

> 1. They only support 2-D arrays or matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It only supports 2-D arrays or matrices.
```

2. The `np.matrix` interface remains the only option in `cupyx.sparse`.

> 3. There is no `cupyx.sparse.dok_matrix` type: One must use SciPy's DOK format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. There is no `cupyx.sparse.dok_matrix` type: one must use SciPy's DOK format.
```

> ### [`torch.sparse`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/sparse.html)
> 
> This submodule of PyTorch allows one to create and operate on mainly N-dimensional COO arrays on the CPU or GPU. Work on `torch.sparse` existed in early releases of PyTorch, starting around 2016.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### torch.sparse

[`torch.sparse`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/sparse.html) is a submodule of PyTorch which allows one to create and operate on mainly N-dimensional COO arrays on the CPU or GPU. Work on `torch.sparse` existed in early releases of PyTorch, starting around 2016.
```

To create a sparse array, one can:

```python
# Call `.to_sparse or .to_sparse_* methods`
spx = x.to_sparse([layout=...])
spx_csr = x.to_sparse_csr()

# Call constructors and use constituent arrays
spy_coo = torch.sparse.coo_tensor(coords, data, [shape, dtype=...])
spy_csr = torch.sparse.csr_tensor(indices, indptr, data, [shape, dtype=...])
```

> The main pain points for `torch.sparse` is the lack of Array API support, with an API differing from most other libraries. For example, the library lacks an `asformat` method and various format-specific methods and lacks DOK support for constructing hyper-sparse tensors in an intuitive manner. On the flip side, `torch.sparse` is the only library to allow for N-dimensional GPU sparse arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main pain point for `torch.sparse` is the lack of Array API support, with an API differing from most other libraries. For example, the library lacks an `asformat` method and various format-specific methods and lacks DOK support for constructing hyper-sparse tensors in an intuitive manner. On the flip side, `torch.sparse` is the only library to allow for N-dimensional GPU sparse arrays.
```

- [**`jax.experimental.sparse`**](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax.experimental.sparse.html): A forward-thinking sparse array module based on the [MLIR sparse tensor dialect](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/SparseTensorOps/).
- [**`pysparse`**](https://pysparse.sourceforge.net/): Not to be confused with `sparse`, this was a package that didn't take off, but has a rather common name.
- [**TACO**](http://tensor-compiler.org/): A C++ package with Python bindings by some of the brains behind performant sparse code generation.
- [**`finch-tensor` and `Finch.jl`**](https://willowahrens.io/Finch.jl/dev): A Julia package with respective Python bindings that's also showing promise and contains some novel research on performant sparse computing.

## Format Support

Support for many different formats can be important, especially as they usually represent differing patterns of sparsity, which in turn represent differing mathematical structures and patterns in nature. Native support for a wide variety of formats can be the key to unlocking significant memory and performance gains.

> All formats have a number of read/write characteristics. For reading, they can be random access or sequential access. The same applies to writing data to a sparse array. Whether they are ordered sequentially in memory is important, as this improves performance and compactness of the format. We list these characteristics below, along with which library supports which format. We have also included a row for N-dimensional capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All formats have a number of read/write characteristics. For reading, they can be random access or sequential access. The same applies to writing data to a sparse array. Whether data is ordered sequentially in memory is important, as this improves performance and compactness of the format. We list these characteristics below, along with which library supports which format. We have also included a row for N-dimensional capabilities.
```

| **DOK**           | ✅              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚧           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **CSR/CSC**       | 🚫              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚧           | ✅                 | ✅                 | 🚧                 |
| **LIL**           | 🚫              | ✅               | 🚫                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚫                 |
| **DIA**           | ✅              | 🚫               | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚧                 | 🚫                 |
| **BSR**           | ✅<sup>1</sup>  | ✅<sup>1</sup>   | ✅                  | 🚫           | 🚧                 | 🚫                 | 🚧                 |
| **N-dimensional** |                 |                  |                     | ✅           | 🚫                 | 🚫                 | ✅                 |

<sup>1</sup> Within same block if it exists, otherwise similar to CSC. <br />
✅ Available, with optimized loops for atomic operations <br />
🚧 Present, with intermediate conversions or sub-optimal iterations <br />

## Conclusion

> The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. However, it's also relatively nascent, and a hard problem without a general solution. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight, along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL, have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole community, and to provide a truly general solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. However, it's also relatively nascent, and a hard problem without a general solution. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight, along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL, have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole community, and to provide a truly general solution. We hope that you'll continue to follow along, as we're hoping to have more to share soon!
```

> The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. However, it's also relatively nascent, and a hard problem without a general solution. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight, along with Professor Samaringhe's group at MIT CSAIL, have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole community, and to provide a truly general solution. We hope that you'll continue to follow along, as we're hoping to have more to share soon!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sparse array ecosystem in Python is, in a word, _fragmented_. However, it's also relatively nascent, and a hard problem without a general solution. We would like to change that for the better. To that end, we at Quansight, along with Professor Amarasinghe's group at MIT CSAIL, have received a grant from DARPA spanning two years of work to help move the ecosystem in a direction that would benefit the whole community, and to provide a truly general solution. We hope that you'll continue to follow along, as we're hoping to have more to share soon!
```
